README.md, before:

# PEtab SciML test suite

The PEtab SciML test suite is a collection of test problems for the [PEtab SciML](https://github.com/PEtab-dev/petab_sciml) data format for scientific machine learning (SciML). Its purpose is to verify and quantify the capabilities of tools that support the PEtab SciML format.

## Downloading

The PEtab SciML test suite can be downloaded from GitHub via:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/sebapersson/petab_sciml_testsuite.git
```

All required test files are pre-built in the repository.

### Installing the Julia utilities

The test suite includes a [Julia](https://julialang.org/) utility library for generating new test cases. To install it, with Julia ≥1.10, from the root directory of repository start Julia and run:

```julia
import Pkg; Pkg.instantiate()
```

## Using the test suite

The PEtab SciML test cases are divided into three categories in the `test_cases` directory:

- Machine learning import. Tests import of models in the PEtab SciML programming language independent YAML format for machine learning models.
- SciML problem import. Tests import of SciML problems combining machine learning models and the mechanistic model in multiple ways.
- Initialization tests. Tests imported SciML problems are initialized correctly.

Note, arrays test values (e.g., ML model inputs, outputs, gradient) are provided in the [HDF5](https://www.hdfgroup.org/solutions/hdf5/) format, in which arrays are stored in row-major format following PyTorch indexing. Therefore, in addition to accounting for the indexing, importers in column-major languages (e.g., Julia, R) need to account for indexing.

### Machine learning model import tests

These tests verify that different ML architectures (e.g., layers, activation functions) defined in the PEtab SciML YAML format (layers, activations) are imported correctly.

For each test case, three random input tensors, parameter sets, and expected outputs are provided as `net_input_i.hdf5`, `net_ps_i.hdf5`, and `net_output_i.hdf5` for i = 1..3. The file `solutions.yaml` lists the input/parameter/output combinations to verify.

It also records per-ecosystem axis orders (e.g., `input_order_py`/`output_order_py` and `input_order_jl`/`output_order_jl`) to handle differing tensor indexing conventions. The test HDF5 files follow the PyTorch layout, so `input_order_py = [C, H, W]` (channel–height–width) describes how tensors are stored. `input_order_jl` then specifies how inputs should be arranged in Julia for performance (efficient memory access). I adding an importer in another another language (e.g., R), include the corresponding input/output orders in `solutions.yaml`. For tests that include dropout, `solutions.yaml` provides a `dropout` field indicating how many forward passes to run for computing the mean that should compared against the reference.

Currently, supported and tested layers and activation functions are:

- **Layers**: `Conv1-3d`, `ConvTranspose1-3d`, `AvgPool1-3d`, `MaxPool1-3d`, `LPPool1-3d`, `AdaptiveMaxPool1-3d`, `AdaptiveMeanPool1-3d`, `BatchNorm1-3d`, `InstanceNorm1-3d`, `LayerNorm`, `Dropout1-3d`, `Dropout`, `AlphaDropout`, `Linear`, `Bilinear` and `Flatten`.
- **Activation**: `relu`, `relu6`, `hardtanh`, `hardswish`, `selu`, `leaky_relu`, `gelu`, `logsigmoid`, `tanhshrink`, `softsign`, `softplus`, `tanh`, `sigmoid`, `hardsigmoid`, `mish`, `elu`, `celu`, `softmax` and `log_softmax`.

A list of supported layers and activation functions for each tool supporting PEtab SciML can be found in the PEtab SciML [documentation](https://petab-sciml.readthedocs.io/latest/layers.html).

### SciML problem import tests

These tests verify that problems combining mechanistic and ML modules are imported correctly. For each test case, reference values are provided for:

- the objective function (likelihood/loss),
- the gradient of the objective
- simulated outputs at the measurement points defined in the PEtab measurement table.

All evaluations should be performed at the PEtab nominal parameter values. The `solutions.yaml` file lists the reference files and the absolute tolerances to use. Gradients should be checked elementwise using the given tolerance. Gradient references files are split by parameter type: mechanistic parameters are provided in TSV, and ML parameters in HDF5 (following the PEtab SciML parameter format). Simulation values are provided in the corresponding order of the measurements table.

These tests can also be adapted to run **without the PEtab SciML YAML format**. The problems here define the ML model via the PEtab SciML YAML, but importers may accept framework-native models (e.g., Lux.jl in Julia). To test such cases, replace the ML YAML asset with one containing the ML module in the target format. Note that the ML model parameter HDF5 files still follow the PEtab SciML ordering; if the target framework uses a different indexing order, adjust the parameters accordingly.

### Initialization tests

These tests verify that nominal ML parameters are imported correctly (e.g., when a subset of layers in a ML model are frozen). For each test case, `solutions.yaml` specifies the reference ML parameter values (in the PEtab SciML neural-network parameter format) that the ML models in the imported PEtab SciML problem should be initialized to.

## Contributing

Contributions to the PEtab SciML test suite are welcome. Please either:

- (Preferred) open a [pull request](https://github.com/sebapersson/petab_sciml_testsuite/pulls) (drafts welcome) adding one or more test cases.
- Or open an [issue](https://github.com/sebapersson/petab_sciml_testsuite/issues) describing the missing coverage.

### Adding a new test case

To add a new test case, create a subdirectory in the relevant suite under `test_cases/`, named with the next three-digit ID (e.g., `003`). Include a short README describing what the test covers. Most test files should be generated automatically using utility functions from this repository’s associated Julia library. We use Julia for its strong SciML ecosystem and mature tooling for computing reference gradients (high-order finite-difference methods).

For **ML model import tests**, provide both `net.jl` and `net.py` script. The `net.jl` script should generate the test inputs, ML parameters, expected outputs, and `solutions.yaml`. The `net.py` script should create the PEtab SciML ML-model YAML file and checks consistency with the ML model used to produce the Julia reference outputs. This ensures the case is importable in both Python (e.g., PyTorch/Equinox) and Julia, aligning with the goal that the PEtab SciML YAML is exchangeable across ecosystems. An example can be found [here](https://github.com/sebapersson/petab_sciml_testsuite/tree/main/test_cases/net_import/001).

For **PEtab SciML import problem tests**, provide a `create.jl` script. It should generate the PEtab problem files and the reference values. For the PEtab problem files, the mapping and hybridisation PEtab tables must be provided manually, the other components can be selected from predefined assets (`assets/` for SBML models, ML-model YAMLs, ML parameters, and array inputs) and defaults in `src/` (new values can be added if needed). For the reference values, include an `llh_id` that maps to a likelihood implementation in `src/test_values/nllh/`. Because these SciML problems are not analytically solvable, the likelihood must be implemented explicitly. An example can be found [here](https://github.com/sebapersson/petab_sciml_testsuite/tree/main/test_cases/hybrid/001).

**Initialization tests** are specified similarly to PEtab SciML import problem.

Commit message:

Update the review following review

README.md, after:

# PEtab SciML test suite

The PEtab SciML test suite is a collection of test problems for the [PEtab SciML](https://github.com/PEtab-dev/petab_sciml) data format for scientific machine learning (SciML). Its purpose is to verify and quantify the capabilities of tools that support the PEtab SciML format.

## Downloading and installing the test suite

The PEtab SciML test suite can be downloaded from GitHub via:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/sebapersson/petab_sciml_testsuite.git
```

All required test files are pre-built in the repository.

### Installing the Julia utility package

The test suite includes a [Julia](https://julialang.org/) package for generating new test cases. To install it, with Julia ≥1.10, from the root directory of repository start Julia and run:

```julia
import Pkg; Pkg.instantiate()
```

## Using the test suite

The PEtab SciML test cases are divided into three categories in the `test_cases` directory:

- Machine learning import. Tests import of models in the PEtab SciML programming language independent YAML format for machine learning models.
- SciML problem import. Tests import of SciML problems combining machine learning models and the mechanistic model in multiple ways.
- Initialization tests. Tests imported SciML problems are initialized correctly.

Note, arrays test values (e.g., ML model inputs, outputs, gradient) are provided in the [HDF5](https://www.hdfgroup.org/solutions/hdf5/) format, in which arrays are stored in row-major format following PyTorch indexing. Therefore, in addition to accounting for the indexing, importers in column-major languages (e.g., Julia, R) need to account for indexing.

### Machine learning model import tests

These tests verify that different ML architectures (e.g., layers, activation functions) defined in the PEtab SciML YAML format (layers, activations) are imported correctly.

For each test case, three random input tensors, parameter sets, and expected outputs are provided as `net_input_i.hdf5`, `net_ps_i.hdf5`, and `net_output_i.hdf5` for i = 1..3. The file `solutions.yaml` lists the input/parameter/output combinations to verify. For tests that include dropout, `solutions.yaml` provides a `dropout` field indicating how many forward passes to run for computing the mean that should compared against the reference.

Currently, supported and tested layers and activation functions are:

- **Layers**: `Conv1-3d`, `ConvTranspose1-3d`, `AvgPool1-3d`, `MaxPool1-3d`, `LPPool1-3d`, `AdaptiveMaxPool1-3d`, `AdaptiveMeanPool1-3d`, `BatchNorm1-3d`, `InstanceNorm1-3d`, `LayerNorm`, `Dropout1-3d`, `Dropout`, `AlphaDropout`, `Linear`, `Bilinear` and `Flatten`.
- **Activation**: `relu`, `relu6`, `hardtanh`, `hardswish`, `selu`, `leaky_relu`, `gelu`, `logsigmoid`, `tanhshrink`, `softsign`, `softplus`, `tanh`, `sigmoid`, `hardsigmoid`, `mish`, `elu`, `celu`, `softmax` and `log_softmax`.

A list of supported layers and activation functions for each tool supporting PEtab SciML can be found in the PEtab SciML [documentation](https://petab-sciml.readthedocs.io/latest/layers.html).

### SciML problem import tests

These tests verify that problems combining mechanistic and ML modules are imported correctly. For each test case, reference values are provided for:

- the objective function (likelihood/loss),
- the gradient of the objective
- simulated outputs at the measurement points defined in the PEtab measurement table.

All evaluations should be performed at the PEtab nominal parameter values. The `solutions.yaml` file lists the reference files and the absolute tolerances to use. Gradients should be checked elementwise using the given tolerance. Gradient references files are split by parameter type: mechanistic parameters are provided in TSV, and ML parameters in HDF5 (following the PEtab SciML parameter format). Simulation values are provided in the corresponding order of the measurements table.

These tests can also be adapted to run **without the PEtab SciML YAML format**. The problems here define the ML model via the PEtab SciML YAML, but importers may accept framework-native models (e.g., Lux.jl in Julia). To test such cases, replace the ML YAML asset with one containing the ML module in the target format. Note that the ML model parameter HDF5 files still follow the PEtab SciML ordering; if the target framework uses a different indexing order, adjust the parameters accordingly.

### Initialization tests

These tests verify that nominal ML parameters are imported correctly (e.g., when a subset of layers in a ML model are frozen). For each test case, `solutions.yaml` specifies the reference ML parameter values (in the PEtab SciML neural-network parameter format) that the ML models in the imported PEtab SciML problem should be initialized to.

### Indexing note (non-Python tools)

Following the PEtab SciML standard, all arrays/tensors in the test HDF5 use PyTorch’s indexing and memory layout (row-major). To aid importers in other ecosystems (e.g., Julia), the machine-learning import tests include per-ecosystem axis orders in `solutions.yaml` (e.g., `input_order_py`/`output_order_py`, `input_order_jl`/`output_order_jl`). These indicate how tensors should be permuted in respective tools for performance (efficient memory access). For example, for images PyTorch expects `(C, H, W)`, whereas Julia uses `(H, W, C)`; accordingly, test case 018 sets `input_order_py = (C, H, W)` and `input_order_jl = (H, W, C)`. If you add an importer for another language (e.g., R), provide the corresponding input/output orders in `solutions.yaml` for the ML import tests.

## Contributing

Contributions to the PEtab SciML test suite are welcome. Please either:

- (Preferred) open a [pull request](https://github.com/sebapersson/petab_sciml_testsuite/pulls) (drafts welcome) adding one or more test cases.
- Or open an [issue](https://github.com/sebapersson/petab_sciml_testsuite/issues) describing the missing coverage.

### Adding a new test case

To add a new test case, create a subdirectory in the relevant suite under `test_cases/`, named with the next three-digit ID (e.g., `003`). Include a short README describing what the test covers. Most test files should be generated automatically using utility functions from this repository’s associated Julia library. We use Julia for its strong SciML ecosystem and mature tooling for computing reference gradients (high-order finite-difference methods). To install this Julia library, with Julia ≥1.10, from the root directory of repository start Julia and run:

```julia
import Pkg; Pkg.instantiate()
```

Which files to add depends on the test type.

For **ML model import tests**, provide both `net.jl` and `net.py` script. The `net.jl` script should generate the test inputs, ML parameters, expected outputs, and `solutions.yaml`. The `net.py` script should create the PEtab SciML ML-model YAML file and checks consistency with the ML model used to produce the Julia reference outputs. This ensures the case is importable in both Python (e.g., PyTorch/Equinox) and Julia, aligning with the goal that the PEtab SciML YAML is exchangeable across ecosystems. An example can be found [here](https://github.com/sebapersson/petab_sciml_testsuite/tree/main/test_cases/net_import/001).

For **PEtab SciML import problem tests**, provide a `create.jl` script. It should generate the PEtab problem files and the reference values. For the PEtab problem files, the mapping and hybridisation PEtab tables must be provided manually, the other components can be selected from predefined assets (`assets/` for SBML models, ML-model YAMLs, ML parameters, and array inputs) and defaults in `src/` (new values can be added if needed). For the reference values, include an `llh_id` that maps to a likelihood implementation in `src/test_values/nllh/`. Because these SciML problems are not analytically solvable, the likelihood must be implemented explicitly. An example can be found [here](https://github.com/sebapersson/petab_sciml_testsuite/tree/main/test_cases/hybrid/001).

**Initialization tests** are specified similarly to PEtab SciML import problem.
